---
title: "Impact of the protein corona on nanomaterial immune response and targeting ability"
collection: publications
date: 2020-01-16
venue: 'Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology'
authors: 'Luca Digiacomo, Daniela Pozzi, Sara Palchetti, Alessandra Zingoni, Giulio Caracciolo'
paperurl: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/wnan.1615
doi: 10.1002/wnan.1615
type: 'Review'
theme: 'lipo, go, delivery'
resources: ''
---

<h2> Abstract </h2>
<p align= "justify">
Over the last decade nanomaterials have had a major impact on human health for the early detection and treatment of many diseases. The future success of clinically translatable nanomaterials lies in the combination of several functionalities to realize a personalized medical experience for patients. To maintain promises, concerns arising from toxic potential and off‐target accumulation of nanomaterials must be addressed first. Upon introduction to a complex biological system (e.g., following systemic administration), nanomaterials interact with all the encountered biomolecules and form the protein corona, a complex coating of plasma proteins that provides them with a totally new biological identity. As the protein corona controls the nanomaterial behavior in vivo, a precise knowledge of the relationship between biological identity and physiological response is needed but not yet achieved. Based on impressive progress made thus far, this review critically discusses how the protein corona activates immune response and influences the targeted delivery of nanomaterials. Furthermore, we comment on emerging strategies to manipulate protein binding in order to promote formation of designer artificial coronas and achieve a desired therapeutic outcome. We conclude by debating challenges that must be overcome to obtain widespread clinical adoption of nanomaterials.

{% include paper-research-resources.html %}
